---
layout: article
title: quotes
---

#### Programming

I'm a huge proponent of designing your code around the data, rather
than the other way around [...]  I will, in fact, claim that the
difference between a bad programmer and a good one is whether he
considers his code or his data structures more important. Bad
programmers worry about the code. Good programmers worry about data
structures and their relationships.

Nobody should start to undertake a large project. You start with a
small trivial project, and you should never expect it to get large. If
you do, you'll just overdesign and generally think it is more
important than it likely is at that stage. Or worse, you might be
scared away by the sheer size of the work you envision. So start
small, and think about the details. Don't think about some big picture
and fancy design. If it doesn't solve some fairly immediate need, it's
almost certainly over-designed. And don't expect people to jump in and
help you. That's not how these things work. You need to get something
half-way useful first, and then others will say "hey, that almost
works for me", and they'll get involved in the project.

Talk is cheap. Show me the code.

[Linus Torvalds](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Linus_Torvalds)

#### General

Learn the rules like a pro, so you can break them like an artist.

Pablo Picasso

Enlightenment is probably antithetical to impatience.

People who want to learn are, however, always welcome.  People who
respect knowledge, know what it costs to acquire it.  People who do
not know its costs will generally not respect it, either.

[Eric Naggum](http://www.xach.com/naggum/)

#### Free Software

Free software is the world's most advanced technical education
system. It allows anybody, anywhere in the world, to get to the state
of the art in anything computers can be made to do, by reading what
is fully available, by experimenting with it and by sharing the
consequences freely.

Eben Moglen
